Welcome to the first module of using
analytics to improve decision making
in business.
This is the third course in
the introduction to business analytics
specialization.
In this course,
we transition from the descriptive and
predictive models that we
introduce in the second course,
to the prescriptive models
that we will discuss here.
We start this transition by answering
the question, what is cluster analysis?
As discussed in the two previous courses,
there are three types of analytics models,
descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive.
Cluster analysis is one of those,
so called, data mining tools.
These tools are typically considered
predictive, but since they help managers
make better decisions,
they can also be considered prescriptive.
The boundaries between descriptive,
predictive and
prescriptive analytics are not precise.
However, as we move from descriptive to
predictive and then prescriptive models,
it is fair to say that the analysis
tends to be a bit more complex.
But it's very useful if it is done well,
cluster analysis refers to a technique for
identifying groups in which
the elements of each group are similar.
The approach is often used in marketing
in order to understand differences
among customers.
The main idea of this
application of cluster analysis
is to create homogeneous market
segments to target product offerings.
In this graphical representation we show
how in practice is not possible to find
perfectly homogeneous groups.
However, the groups resulting from
cluster analysis are similar in some way.
For example,
the orange cluster includes round objects.
Not all of them are of the same color or
size, and
some are crossed out,
but they are all round.
The objects in the green and blue clusters
are also similar among themselves,
but they are not exactly the same.
What is important is to be
able to describe each cluster.
In this simple example,
the orange cluster may be described as
a group of multi-colored round objects.
The green cluster may be characterized
as a group of square objects.
And the blue cluster consists of
triangular and diamond-shaped objects.
Now, let's take a look
at a real world example.
Consumers around the world continue to
embrace natural and organic products.
Consumers have become
increasingly concerned
about what is in their products they buy.
They have created an industry that,
in 2012, the market intelligence firm,
Information Resources Inc., estimated
to be $81 billion in the United States.
Information resources
survey 5,000 customers and
match the participants answers with
the actual purchasing behavior.
The analysis of the data focus
on segmenting the US market
by considering relationships
between shoppers and
natural, organic, and
eco-friendly products.
The market segmentation was
assigned to help manufacturers and
retailers to achieve new levels of growth
through a better understanding
of these shoppers needs.
The cluster analysis identified seven
consumer segments based on lifestyle,
history of purchasing organic and
natural products, attitudes towards these products, and demographics.
These segments were labeled as True
Believers, Enlightened Environmentalist,
Strapped Seekers, Healthy Realists,
Indifferent Traditionalists,
Struggling Switchers and
Resistant Non-believers.
Detecting the segments
that are good targets for
natural and organic markets was one
of the main outcomes of the analysis.
True Believers and
Enlightened Environmentalists were
identified as a key segments.
They represent 18% of the population but
together,
they drive nearly half of the total sales.
True Believers are passionate about
staying fit and healthy, they are focused
on trying new things and serving as
a strong role models for their children.
They are strong believers in the benefit
of natural and organic products,
their median income is
highest among all segments.
Their average age is 40 and
they have at least a college education.
Enlightened Environmentalists
are passionate about the environment and
about making good choices to preserve it.
These shoppers are committed
to make healthier choices and
go out of their way to shop at stores
that carry natural and organic products.
Enlightened Environmentalist
are older than True Believers
averaging 63 years old, but
have a slightly lower median income.
It is interesting to note that the
analysis show that both of these segments
shared the same top priorities regarding
food, home care, and personal care.
The importance of this cluster analysis,
is that it was able to identify
groups of manufacturers and
retailers who can motivate to learn
more about organic and natural products.
For example, the analysis show
that the Strapped Seekers and
Healthy Realist are a strong target,
driving 24% of sales,
or representing 25% of the consumers.
Strapped Seekers believe and seek natural
products, when their budget allows it.
They realize the benefit of natural and
organic products and
have the potential of becoming
True Believers as their income increases.
Healthy Realists are passionate
about being fit but
find it difficult deciding whether to
buy healthy or traditional products.
Closer analysis show that not
all segments are worth pursuing.
Indifferent Traditionalists lead
a simple life with few passions.
They are not likely to buy
natural/organic products because
they don't see the reason to change.
Struggling Switchers know that they
should be eating healthier and
exercising more but
focus on staying within their budgets.
Resistant Non-believers got very little
desire to support all their options for
things to buy, so
they stay loyal to the products they know.
Market segmentation is not
the only application of cluster
analysis in business.
Clustering is also used in market
strategies such as product and
price segmentation.
Because applications in areas such as
human resources and operations management.
In product segmentation, closer
analysis identifies groups of consumers
who want different benefits or levels
of functionality of a product category.
The results are used to offer
different versions of a product,
in order to match consumers
needs more precisely.
Coffee producers, for
example, offer regular and
decaffeinated versions of the same brand.
In brand segmentation the same
product is offered at different prices
to different groups.
Higher prices are offered to customers in
groups that are willing to pay for extras
or pay for better quality packaging,
or for additional customer services.
In human resources, clustering could
identify characteristics of successful
employees in order to improve
recruiting and hiring practices.
Grouping customers by geographical
areas is a typical application
of cluster analysis in
operations management.
We have shown how cluster analysis can be
very useful as a market segmentation tool.
In this module, we will explore additional
clustering applications, but first,
we will learn how to perform the analysis
and how to interpret results.